Compiler implementation (#22)
effekt-lang/effekt-website: docs/implementation/lift-inference.md

---
layout: docs
title: Lift Inference
---

# Lift Inference

> Programs in the Effekt surface language are translated to the underlying Core language.

Author: Maybe we can mention that `Core` corresponds to `System Xi` in Brachthäuser 2020 and to `System C` in the 2022 OOPSLA paper?

In order to efficiently compile programs in Core, the overhead incurred by using
effect handlers should be minimized. In particular, the search for the correct handler
at runtime should be avoided. This can be facilitated by making so-called lifting

> information explicit and using this information for a translation to iterated CPS.

Author: That's correct, but maybe mention that Core already is in "capability-passing style"?

```effekt:core
effect Exc1(): String
effect Exc2(): String

def main() =
  try {
    def abort(): String / {} = { do Exc1() }
    try {
      abort()
    } with Exc2 {
      () => "aborted two"
    }
  } with Exc1 {
    () => "aborted one"
  }
```

```effekt:repl
main()
```

In this program two exception effects, `Exc1` and `Exc2` are declared. The block `abort`
is defined within the outer handler, which handles `Exc1`, and simply performs the effect
operation `Exc1`. As is visible in the signature of `abort` (with an empty effect set) the
effect is handled by the outer handler, even though `abort` is called inside of the inner
handler. The result of running the program thus is `"aborted one"`.

By clicking on "edit" the corresponding code in Core becomes visible. There the effect
operations become explicit capabilities bound at the corresponding handlers. When `abort`
is called, the `Exc1`-capability is executed and has to jump over the inner handler to its
binding site, or to put it differently, it has to be lifted. At runtime this amounts to
searching for the correct handler on the stack. By making explicit which capabilities

> have to be lifted to which handlers, such a runtime search can be rendered unnecessary.

Author: Great! Ok, here it is mentioned that Core performs capability passing.

### Regions and subregion evidence

> A structured way to do so is to introduce a region system and explicit subregion evidence.

Author: ```suggestion
A structured way to make explicit which capability has to be lifted to which handler is to introduce a region system and explicit subregion evidence.
```

Every handler opens a new region in its body and the corresponding capability has to
run in this exact region. Each handler then additionally binds evidence that the new
region it opens is a subregion of the region it is defined in. The capability bound by
the handler can then be called in every subregion of the handler by providing it with
the correct subregion evidence.

Consider the following variation of the above example without the `abort`-block:

```effekt:lifted
effect Exc1(): String
effect Exc2(): String

def main() =
  try {
    try {
      do Exc1()
    } with Exc2 {
      () => "aborted two"
    }
  } with Exc1 {
    () => "aborted one"
  }
```

> By clicking on "edit" the corresponding code in the Lifted Core language is shown. There

Author: Maybe mention our PLDI 2022 paper here?

the subregion evidence is explicit. The inner handler binds evidence that its new region
is a subregion of the region of the outer handler and this evidence is then provided in
the call of `Exc1`, making it explicit that `Exc1` has to jump over the inner handler to
run in the region of the outer handler.

### Region and evidence inference

Back to the original example. There the call to `Exc1` is within the definition of `abort`
which is not inside the inner handler. Nevertheless, `abort` is called inside the inner
handler and hence the call to `Exc1` only is only executed there, so it should again be

> provided with the evidence bound at the inner handler.

Author: The above paragraph is a bit difficult to understand.
